Skip to Article Content
Skip to Article Information
Wiley Online Library
University Of Nebraska Lincoln
Search
Search within
This Journal
Search term
Search


Login / Register

Birth
Birth
Full Access
Partner Support and Pregnancy Wantedness
Charlan D Kroelinger MA, Kathryn S Oths PhD
First published: 24 December 2001 https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-536x.2000.00112.xCitations: 57
Address correspondence to Kathryn Oths, University of Alabama, Department of Anthropology, Box 870210, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0210.
SECTIONSPDFTOOLS SHARE
Abstract
Background: Women who experience unwanted pregnancy are at a greater risk of complicated pregnancy outcomes, and their children are more likely to experience physical or psychological problems in infancy, than those women with wanted pregnancies. The objective of this research was to explain the impact of a partner on women's decisions to want or not want their pregnancies. Methods: A primary study subsample of 349 clinical interviews of pregnant women comprised the quantitative portion of the analysis, with a secondary study subsample of 20 in-depth qualitative interviews of pregnant women complementing the statistical findings. Both samples included adult women (at least age 20 yr) of different ethnic groups who received Medicaid for their pregnancies and were in their first or early second trimester of pregnancy. Chi-square, t tests, and logistic regression were used for statistical analyses.Results:A partner's stability, status, feelings toward pregnancy, and level of dependability and support all had a significant influence on women's experiences of unwanted pregnancy. Variables including use of contraception (OR = 3.3), women's ethnicity (OR = 1.9), partner's feelings about pregnancy (OR = 2.0), amount of social support (OR = 1.2), and mother's instrumental support (OR = 0.85) all affected women's perceptions of wanting the pregnancy. These results were used to create a model of unwanted pregnancy, beginning before conception and ending with either termination of pregnancy or initiation of prenatal care.Conclusions:The support and concern of a partner during pregnancy can have positive consequences for a mother's desire to carry out the pregnancy. To increase their commitment to the pregnancy and childbirth, partners should be included more in the prenatal care process.

Unwanted pregnancy is an issue of serious concern to public health. In Alabama, the site of this research, a recent study reported that 40 percent of pregnancies were unwanted or unplanned ( 1). Women who express unwanted pregnancy are more likely to experience complicated or abnormal pregnancy outcomes ( 2,3), and may delay prenatal care ( 4,5). In addition, some research suggests that adverse neonatal and perinatal complications may result from an unwanted pregnancy ( 6,7). Thus, although unwanted pregnancy is a state occurring before birth, its effects may be expressed in problematic birth outcomes and subsequent physical or psychological illnesses in infancy and childhood ( 8,9).

A major factor in a woman's decision whether or not to want her pregnancy is the influence of the people with whom she shares an intimate relationship before and during her pregnancy, especially her partner. Several studies have suggested a partner's influence in relation to various pregnancy-related issues, but none centered on a partner's effect on the wantedness of the pregnancy. For instance, researchers have examined the feelings and behavior of partners in reference to contraceptive practices ( 10,11), the couvade syndrome ( 12,13), and abortion ( 14). A partner's level of participation in a pregnancy has been assessed using measures of his detachment and coping style ( 15–17), as well as his anxiety or stress level prenatally and perinatally ( 18–21). Still other researchers have focused on the partner's level of social support during pregnancy ( 22,23), the level of participation of a partner in the life of his infant ( 24), and the effects of pregnancy on a partner's perception of his own masculinity ( 25,26).

Partner support, stability, opinion about the desirability of the pregnancy, and status of the relationship with the mother are viewed as major components in a woman's decision to consider a pregnancy as being wanted or unwanted. Partner influence may be particularly acute in situations of resource scarcity, where the psychosocial and financial means of a mother-to-be to care for a child by herself are limited. The aim of this study was to examine the partner's role and influence on pregnancy wantedness in a multivariate model that explained his impact on a woman's pregnancy.

In the literature on pregnancy wantedness, unwanted pregnancy is inconsistently defined and employed. Some definitions do not differentiate between unplanned, unintentional, mistimed, and unwanted pregnancies ( 27–29). According to Miller ( 30), all of these terms denote different phases of the general event of wantedness. For instance, planning a pregnancy takes place before intercourse. When a woman thinks about becoming pregnant and decides that she is ready to have a child, the resulting pregnancy is planned. Intention occurs around the time of conception and involves the physical act of prevention or nonprevention of pregnancy. Likewise, timing of a pregnancy is based on when a woman believes she is more likely to get pregnant. Miller used wantedness both in the specific sense of whether or not a woman, once pregnant, wants her baby, and in a broad sense to refer to the entire process of decision making surrounding conception and pregnancy. In this study, unwanted pregnancy is defined in the specific sense as a negative attitude on the part of an expecting mother toward the pregnancy when she first finds out that she is pregnant.

Methods
Two phases of data collection and analysis were carried out from 1993 through 1997. The first involved interviews of pregnant women for a National Institutes of Health-funded study on job strain and birth outcomes, of which a subsample was used for this analysis(349/497) comprising all black and white women who completed interviews during both the first and third trimesters. This group is considered the primary study subsample. The subsequent phase consisted of intensive interviews with 20 pregnant women, forming the secondary study subsample. The second round of interviews was mostly qualitative, employed to arrive at a more in-depth understanding of issues and questions that surfaced from the quantitative data of the primary study.

The primary study sample was collected at three prenatal clinics in Tuscaloosa County, Alabama: The Tuscaloosa County Health Department (n= 127), the Capstone Medical Center, a university teaching clinic (n= 206), and Maude Whatley, a federally funded clinic for low-income patients (n= 16). Sampling was consecutive, with a response rate of 66 percent. Interviews ranged from 30 to 60 minutes, and took place at the clinic during patient prenatal appointments. The criteria for study inclusion were age between 20 and 34 years, gestation of no more than 14 weeks at the time of the first interview, and absence of high-risk factors for low birthweight, such as twins, chronic diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and seizure disorders.

The secondary study sample was obtained at the Tuscaloosa County Health Department during participant prenatal appointments. The quota-based sample was divided into two categories of women—those who stated they wanted (n= 10) and did not want (n= 10) their pregnancies. The response rate was 100 percent. The sensitive topic of wantedness was best addressed later in the interview after rapport was established. Therefore, to fill the quotas expediently, three screening questions assessing emotions, feelings about pregnancy, and problems resulting from pregnancy were used to predict initially whether an informant wanted or did not want her pregnancy. The screening questions were based on correlational data from the primary study. The criteria for interviews were age between 20 and 25 years, gestation between 1 and 20 weeks, and black or white ethnicity. The interviews lasted from 30 to 45 minutes.

The primary study addressed various factors known or suspected to influence birth outcomes, including pregnancy wantedness, whereas the secondary study focused solely on predictors and indicators of unwanted pregnancy. Both interview guides contained open- and closed-ended questions that gauged partner (whether past or current) and mother influence and support. The primary study included a 7-point perceived social support scale based on the Norbeck Social Support Questionnaire ( 31), with questions addressing issues such as who made the woman feel liked or loved, made her feel important, comforted her when she was upset, gave her a ride when she needed it, loaned her money when she needed it, helped her if she were sick, and helped her in an emergency. The scale was examined as a whole, and also divided into separate emotional and instrumental support scales. Social support in the secondary study focused on questions detailing the relationship of a woman with her partner.

Unwanted pregnancy was assessed in both samples by the two questions, “When you first found out you were pregnant (i.e., before the end of the first trimester for the primary study, before 20 weeks' gestation for the secondary study), did you really feel like you wanted to have a baby?” and “Do you want this baby now (i.e., third trimester)?” In the primary study, 57 percent wanted their baby during the first trimester, whereas the number increased to 97 percent by the third trimester, a typical pattern of change during pregnancy ( 30). Therefore, wantedness in the following analyses was based on the former. A partner's influence was evaluated by means of a series of questions asking a woman if she were dating the father of her baby, how she thought her partner felt about the pregnancy, did she believe she could depend on him, and also if she included him in her list of people providing emotional and instrumental support.

All questions assessing a partner's influence were cross-tabulated with wantedness. Next, the seven items in the social support scale were cross-tabulated individually with wantedness. Three social support scales were then formed from the items (instrumental, emotional, and the combined total), checked for reliability, and independently tested with wantedness. Finally, a backwards stepwise logistic regression was used to create a model of wantedness based on quantitative results and supported by qualitative information. The dependent variable wantedness was coded: wanted = 0, unwanted = 1. Contraception use was coded 0 for no and 1 for yes. White ethnicity was coded 0 and black 1. Happy partner feelings about the pregnancy were coded 0 and unhappy 1. Mother's instrumental support was a 4-point scale ranging from no support (0) to full support (4), whereas partner's overall social support was coded from 0 to 6 in the same direction. Three cases with missing data were excluded from this analysis.

Results
The demographic characteristics of the primary and secondary study subsamples are listed in Table 1. All women in both samples were receiving Medicaid for prenatal care and treatment during their pregnancy. The mean age of 24 years for women who said their pregnancy was wanted when they first found out was significantly greater than for women with an unwanted pregnancy, at 23 years (t= 2.47; p= 0.014). The characteristics of the secondary sample were similar to those of the primary sample, although given the more limited age range sampled, the mean age for the secondary sample was somewhat younger.

Table 1. Characteristics of Primary Study Sample (n = 349) and Secondary Sample (n= 20)
image
An important precursor to the amount of influence a partner has on unwanted pregnancy is the stability of his relationship with a woman. Marital status in the primary study was determined as single with no current partner, single and currently dating, and married or living with a partner. To be clear, in some cases the current partner was not the father of the baby. A significant relationship existed between marital status and pregnancy wantedness, with more women who were single and not dating labeling their pregnancies as unwanted ( Table 2). It would appear, then, that stability of partnership positively affected how women felt about their pregnancies.

Table 2. Summary of Chi-Square Tests Focusing on Women Who Labeled Their Pregnancies as Unwanted (n= 345)
image
In the secondary study sample, women were asked to describe their relationships with their partners. Generally, all 20 women had what they labeled as “good” or “okay” relationships with their partners; however, 4 of the 10 women who said that their pregnancies were unwanted were working through crises in their current relationships. Each of these women had recently found out that her partner had cheated on her. Anne, who was 20 years old and 10 weeks pregnant with her second child, told the story of how she had just found out that her partner had made his mistress pregnant. When asked to talk about their relationship, she related her feelings:

With him? It's sort of like depressing. But right now, we just starting to get things back together. He was in … it's bad with him. In May, he was out fooling around last year, and he ends up getting somebody else pregnant. Well, he said it's not his baby, and her friend told me that that's what he wants me to believe. But other than that, a blood test is the only thing we could do that would tell us both. And sometimes I am depressed once I get to thinking about it and I get to crying all just to myself. I don't want to say nothing; sometimes saying something to him makes it worse, so I just say nothing to him, and yesterday he told me. What he told me was … about the relationship he had since me and him are trying to get back together and everything. You know, when you are in your first trimester of being pregnant, you, like, be moody and be depressed and stressed or something, and I be okay sometimes and sometimes I don't. I mean, there's no reason for him to go and mess around on me. I mean—he had no reason. I wasn't doing it. But you know, you don't notice things about somebody you love … especially about somebody you love and you trust. He is a good person and I know he is good to me. That's why I thought, I couldn't ever see him cheating on me. He always said, if he's cheating on me, he's got to be the sneakiest man around because he spend too much time being interested in our place.

The excerpt demonstrates the importance of partnership to a woman, especially during pregnancy. Anne needed her partner's support even though she was struggling to deal with adultery. Her story shows more than just the importance of a partner's influence during pregnancy—it illustrates the complications that occur in the everyday interactions between women and their partners, and ultimately, the reality of the lives of all women who must decide if their pregnancies are wanted or unwanted.

A partner's feelings about a woman's pregnancy are also reflected in her experience of wanting the pregnancy. In the primary data set a woman was asked how she thought her partner felt about the pregnancy. Of women who had partners who said they were unhappy about the pregnancy, over 50 percent more women said their pregnancies were unwanted compared with those whose partners were happy ( Table 2).

Whether or not a woman felt she could depend on her partner was tested for its relationship with wantedness. The variable was assessed through the use of a question that evaluated the presence or absence of partner help during and after pregnancy (which, when asked to elaborate, women tended to define in terms of financial, emotional, housework, and child care support). Among those who believed they could not depend on their partners, significantly more said they did not want the pregnancy than those who believed they could depend on their partners ( Table 2). The importance of depending on a partner was exemplified by Jennifer, who was 25 years old and 13 weeks' pregnant:

We've been together since eighth grade. We married a year after high school. I mean, he's just not an unreliable person. I mean, he wouldn't just leave me. We have a really strong marriage.

The amount of financial support a partner provided during pregnancy was also measured. Women not cohabiting with the father of the baby were asked if he contributed financially during the pregnancy (the father was assumed to contribute if he lived in a woman's household). Women who received no financial support from the father of their baby were more likely to express feelings for an unwanted pregnancy ( Table 2). Financial support during pregnancy appeared to play a large role in how women ultimately perceived their pregnancies. Women in the secondary study were not asked about partner financial support, since all were currently living with their partners.

Another measure of the amount of support a woman received from her current partner was whether or not she included him in her social support network. Overall, 82 percent of women included a partner in their networks. Women who did not include partners in this network were nearly twice as likely to express feelings for unwanted pregnancies as those who did include them ( Table 2). This clearly demonstrated a strong effect of partner support on pregnancy wantedness, with women who lacked partner support being nearly twice as likely to claim their pregnancies as unwanted.

Each of the seven categories evaluating emotional and instrumental support by partner was examined for its independent relationship with wantedness. All but one of the items were significantly associated with wantedness ( Table 2). No significant difference occurred between women who did and did not feel they could ask a partner to lend them money in terms of pregnancy wantedness. Perhaps women who were married or living with their partners did not deem it necessary to “borrow” money from their partners. The above measures of social support, when taken together, displayed a consistent relationship between perceived emotional and instrumental support from a partner and pregnancy wantedness.

The reliability of the social support scale was assessed, with the scale then tested against wantedness. With the item about money lending deleted, the alpha was 0.90. A t test identified the scale as a significant predictor of pregnancy wantedness, with women who said their pregnancies were wanted being more likely to believe overall support was available (mean = 5.24) than women who said their pregnancies were unwanted (mean = 4.26) (t= 4.00, p= 0.000). When the scale was divided into its two component parts of emotional and instrumental support to see if one affected wantedness more than the other, the emotional support scale had an alpha of 0.86, and the instrumental support scale an alpha of 0.81 (again, with money lending omitted). Both emotional support and instrumental support were highly positively associated with wantedness (t= 4.36, p= 0.000; t= 3.23, p= 0.001, respectively).

Although not quantitatively measured, relationships between support and wantedness in the secondary study echoed those of the primary study. Women talked about their partners' support in terms of financial and emotional assistance as well as support with childcare and other household activities. Although all of the women listed their partners as the primary people they looked to for support, some believed that support to be short lived. Many of the women whose pregnancies were unwanted said they would be happy if their current partners remained with them for a few years. Sheila, age 21 years and 11 weeks into her second pregnancy, did not have much faith in her partner's future level of commitment:

I know I won't have to worry about … it's that time, when the baby is like, one year old. You know, when he's used to the baby he might want to start back being out again. He gonna know the baby's there now, so. You know, probably I think I can rely on him for the Pampers and the milk and all that. But I'm scared about the time, I'm not sure about that. Like I said, probably after it's about a year old he probably is there everyday. When they get about two or three, start walking and talking, I think it's gonna change. He gonna get used to that baby, he gonna know it's there. He might be around. You know, probably the first year he gonna be there everyday, and then, time it's two or three years old … every now and then. Like, you know, I could be sitting here talking to you, and the baby could be there (points to the corner of the room), or I can put that baby in my lap and talk to you, or I could put that baby down. That's how I think it gonna be. That baby's gonna be there, but he probably is not gonna be here. It's not gonna be the same as it was.

After the influence of the partner was examined by itself as a predictor of wantedness, it was incorporated into a logistic regression model with other variables expected to influence women's decisions to want or not want their pregnancies. Table 3 shows the model with the best fit, which includes contraception use, ethnicity, a partner's feelings about the pregnancy, his financial support during the pregnancy, the 6-point social support scale of emotional and instrumental partner support, and a mother's instrumental social support. The only variable entered that did not remain in the model was the question assessing a partner's financial support during pregnancy (p= 0.582).

Table 3. Logistic Regression for the Association Between Unwantedness and Various Social and Demographic Factors (n= 346)
image
Women who were using contraception around the time they became pregnant were over three times more likely to label the pregnancy as unwanted than women who were not using contraception ( Table 3). Black women were 94 percent more likely than white women to say their pregnancy was unwanted. In addition, women who said their partners felt negatively about the pregnancy were twice as likely than women who said their partners had positive feelings to label their pregnancy as unwanted. When examining mother's instrumental support, with every unit increase in a mother's instrumental support during pregnancy, there was a 21 percent increase in the likelihood that a woman would say that her pregnancy was unwanted. Conversely, the lack of a partner's emotional and instrumental support was related to unwantedness; that is, each unit increase in social support resulted in an 18 percent reduction in the likelihood of unwantedness. When examined together, these five factors described the pathway to an unwanted pregnancy. A woman who was experiencing an unwanted pregnancy would likely have experienced some or all of these factors throughout her pregnancy.

Discussion and Conclusions
The predictor variables in the logistic regression can be ordered in a model showing the logical chain of events that lead to unwantedness. A prototypical pathway of wantedness is displayed in Fig. 1. The initial step in the model of unwantedness included the lack of planning the pregnancy, followed by a stage of irregular, ineffective, or consistent contraceptive use during intercourse. This step included those women who used contraception most of the time but who stopped one time and became pregnant, and women who experienced prophylactic failure. Next, women assessed how they believed their partners felt once informed of the pregnancy. Women already experiencing unwanted pregnancy often found that their partners were unhappy about the pregnancy. They also decided how much they could depend on their partners during the pregnancy. When women thought that their partners were not dependable, their likelihood of experiencing an unwanted pregnancy increased. They then assessed the actual amount of financial help their partners gave them through the first trimester. If partners gave no financial support, the women were even more likely to experience unwanted pregnancy. In addition, whether or not women thought they could go to their partners for emotional and instrumental support played a large role in pregnancy wantedness. If their partners withdrew emotional and instrumental support and their mothers compensated, they were all the more likely to experience an unwanted pregnancy.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
A prototypical model of wantedness.

Because of a lack of partner support, the experience of unwantedness was inflated by the addition of negative feelings, such as unhappiness and depression, and self-blame for the pregnancy (as indicated by the screening questions). At this point, women stopped verbalizing unwantedness and began to express it in other ways, such as talking about the problems they had experienced throughout their pregnancies. The peak of unwantedness occurred when women considered the option to terminate or passively accept the pregnancy.

The resolution of an unwanted pregnancy finally began with women's active decisions to terminate the pregnancy or schedule an initial prenatal appointment. If they decided to start prenatal care, once inside the clinical setting where perceptions of pregnancy were positively reinforced and negative perceptions socially stigmatized, their feelings would become more positive in relation to the pregnancy, and the emotions about unwantedness might begin to dissipate. However, abortion at a later date might still be chosen. This interpretation is supported by the primary study finding that 43 percent did not want the baby when they first found out they were pregnant compared with just 2 percent by the end of their pregnancy.

A wanted pregnancy will include all of the steps involved in the description of an unwanted pregnancy, except that a woman's feelings and practices about wanting the pregnancy will be the opposite of those feelings and practices of a woman experiencing an unwanted pregnancy. Although the experience of wantedness may seem unilinear, during the course of an unwanted pregnancy a woman may, at any time, based on certain events or discoveries, decide she wants the pregnancy or vice versa. For example, if her initial feelings about the pregnancy were negative due to lack of planning and inconsistent contraceptive use, when her partner was informed and reacted positively, she might begin to shift her feelings toward approving and wanting the pregnancy.

The experience of unwanted pregnancy causes repercussions for women both physically and mentally. The indicators used to assess wantedness—stability of relationship as well as partner dependability, support, and feelings toward pregnancy—affect a woman's lived experience as well as her baby's welfare.

As discussed above, the opinion and support of a partner, whether he is the father of the baby or a current boyfriend, have a great impact on pregnancy wantedness. Both emotional and instrumental partner support are integral to a desired pregnancy, as indicated by the greater proportion of women who claimed to have an unwanted pregnancy when they lacked such support. To influence partner support during pregnancy, clinicians and social workers must endeavor to include partners in the prenatal care. Once partners feel that they have input into the care of their unborn child, they may be more inclined to give positive support throughout the pregnancy and childbirth. Further research on the issues surrounding the influence of the partner may clarify the differing types of support needed by women once they become pregnant and are faced with the decision to want or not want their pregnancies.

References
Citing Literature

Volume27, Issue2

June 2000

Pages 112-119


Figures
References
Related
Information


Download PDF
Additional links
ABOUT WILEY ONLINE LIBRARY
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
About Cookies
Manage Cookies
Accessibility
Wiley Research DE&I Statement and Publishing Policies
Developing World Access
HELP & SUPPORT
Contact Us
Training and Support
DMCA & Reporting Piracy
OPPORTUNITIES
Subscription Agents
Advertisers & Corporate Partners
CONNECT WITH WILEY
The Wiley Network
Wiley Press Room
Copyright © 1999-2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc or related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Wiley Home Page